# DemoDataModule
Import this module in the root AppModule to automatically generate meaningful data
for testing and demo purposes.

## Use the DemoDataModule to generate demo entities
1. Import the module to the root AppModule's imports: `imports: [ /* other imports */, DemoDataModule.forRoot()]`
2. Inject the `DemoDataService` somewhere (ideally during bootstrap or in the AppComponent) and call its `publishDemoData()` method
3. The DatabaseService now contains the generated demo entities.

You can customize the number and type of entities generated by passing an array of `DemoDataGenerator` providers
to `DemoDataModule.forRoot()`:
```
DemoDataModule.forRoot([
  DemoChildGenerator.provider({count: 50}), // generate 50 Child entities
  DemoSchoolGenerator.provider({count: 5}), // generate 5 School entities
  DemoChildSchoolRelationGenerator.provider(), // generate ChildSchoolRelations
]);
```


## Add additional generators for other Entity types
1. Implement a service that `extends DemoDataGenerator` and
write a `generateEntities(): Entity[]` method that returns an array of demo entities that you generate in that service.
2. It is best practice to also implement a static method `provider()` that returns a provider object that can be used in a modules `provides` array.
This static method should accept a config object (e.g. how many entities will be generated)
see the existing demo data generators for an example.
3. Import (`import {faker} from '../demo-data/faker';`) our (customized) [faker.js](https://github.com/marak/Faker.js/)
to easily generate realistic property values like names or dates.
4. You can use Angular's dependency injection to inject any other services that you may rely on to generate meaningful demo data.
This way you can also inject other DemoDataGenerators if you need to generate entities related to other types of entities.
(e.g. inject `demoChildren: DemoChildGenerator` in your constructor and then use `this.demoChildren.entities` to access all generated `Child` entities).
5. To include your demo data generator when the `DemoDataService` actually triggers the data generation
add it to the config array when calling `DemoDataModule.forRoot()` (see above)
and/or add it to the `DEFAULT_DEMO_GENERATOR_PROVIDERS` in `demo-data.module.ts`
